>> Will Sentance: This is a side effect.
It's a consequence of the function.
And remember, this is especially bad
because the running of this function,
it's only consequence must be this portion
here literally becomes the number 10.
Meaning, we use that fact here, right?
And we use that result into the running
of the next function in this case of
divided by 5.
If instead running add 3,
in that case it was with the input of
22 by that point, if you remember.
Add 3 [INAUDIBLE].
If we had this add three function also
have a global state consequences,
a consequence for our global memory.
Again, I'm already repeating
the same thing, you already got it.
But if you had a global effect,
that add three function isn't add three,
it's add three plus mystery stuff.
And our notion of our line of add three
here being truly self contained and
it's only consequence
being the line below.
And all of the lines having
zero dependency relation to it,
they don't depend on it at all,
completely collapses.
And we're back to the world
of every single line,
I need to check exactly what it's doing
and compare whether it has any effect or
dependency of any other line in the code.
And the whole thing's collapsed.
>> Will Sentance: If my function is able
to have these consequences outside of its
own line.
And if it's referring to something's
that's on its local memory in that line,
especially in the short functions is
one line but not as local memory.
It's impure,
it destroys our whole model here.
Let me have thumbs at this point cuz I
don't want to keep repeating that in
different ways if people
got it from just that.
You lost me, clear, clarification.
It's okay.
Okay, some people aren't clear on it.
All right, I sometimes over dwell on this.
Okay, so we need functions that are pure,
only consequence being their return value.
Well if that's the case, let's just
make sure we have no side effects.
There may be a side effect you've missed.
And it relies on the fact that, if we want
the only consequence in that to be on that
line and to achieve reference to
transparency, I can replace the function
output and it's the same,
then I need to, my function is pure.
I need to preserve my data and
not manipulate it at all.
Here's the problem you might have missed,
a side effect that you didn't realize.
And it's related to the fact that
JavaScript passes when it executes
a function, so
here we're gonna have array 1, 2, 3.
Model number two is a function.
We're gonna run map on that array 1, 2, 3,
which would run probably by two
on the one, more two on to two,
more by two on to three, and
store them in a new array for good reason.
Because the array 1, 2, 3 that gets
thrown into map is not
copying that array 1,
2, 3 into maps execution context.
In fact, it's just linking back to
the originally globally saved version.
Meaning, if inside of map you start
altering the array that's being
also passed in,
you're altering the array out in global.
And now suddenly your line that
you think is nice and clean and
has no effects outside of it,
is actually via your input of that line.
Having global effects, having effects
that could have consequences for
every other line in your code base.
If map did not work the way it
does by inside of it not mutating,
not changing the input array 1,2, 3 but
instead creating a brand new array
taking our elements, doubling them,
sticking those in the array,
then this would not be true.
We would not get the same behavior
by using the same line of code.
We would get 2, 4, 6 and
then I guess we'd get in the next
slide if it use the same array.
We'd get what, Seth?
David Duke?
>> David: 4, 8, 12.
>> Will Sentance: Exactly,
4, 8, 12, exactly.
If we mutate the input array of
our function, it's not pure,
it's unpredictable.
I can't figure out what it
does just by reading it and
looking at its output there in that line.
And undoes all our hard work,
because if we mutate the array,
we change the array that we threw into
map, let's diagram it for a second.
We've run out of space here.
This is the last thing we're
gonna do on this whole set.
Let's just diagram this here.
Well, let's just write it out.
This is the last piece of this
section before you have to prepare for
programming.
Anna, line one, what are we doing?
>> Anna: We are declaring an array of 1,
2, 3.
>> Will Sentance: 1, 2, 3, excellent.
Next line, Alex?
>> Alex: Declaring a function,
they will multiply by 2.
>> Will Sentance: Thank you, Alex.
I'm very glad you said function as well,
exactly.
Said 2, [INAUDIBLE].
[SOUND] You got that fine.
Next line, Charles?
>> Charles: Declaring our result.
>> Will Sentance: Okay.
And so we do result is .array 1,
2, 3 don't map,
which we remember now is the function
that takes each element of our array.
Creates a brand new array, creates a
array, creates a brand new array inside of
itself applies to each element of
the array one, then two, then three.
And takes those single element, and
there by the way not passed around by
reference to their original birth version.
They're passed around by
just copying them in memory.
As a value, they're not copied,
they're just saved as a new value.
And we double inside of this map,
we create a new array into which the 1,
2, 3, we take each one and
multiply it by 2.
If we did not,
if instead we altered the input array,
the array that gets thrown in,
we would be altering this array.
Meaning, this line here would be
having influence on all other lines.
Cuz any other line in my code,
I can refer to this array.
Meaning, it becomes dependent on
my running of array.map if map
did not work the way we wanted it to.
And instead mutated the input one,
two, three,
meaning we are determined in order
to make sure every line of code we
run is self contained on that line
only to not mutate any data where
it is passed by reference,
by a link back to its original version.
And it's that little hidden thing where we
might otherwise break our pure function
rules without even realizing it.